Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Richard Lops, and
today I'm joined by Dr. Francesca Rossi. She's an
IBM fellow and the IBM AI ethics global leader,
and today we're going to talk about AI ethics.
So Dr. Rossi, welcome to the show. It's a
pleasure to everyone. Thank you. Thank you for having
me. Uh, OK, so let me start perhaps with
the most basic question here. So what is AI
ethics and what kinds of questions does it deal
with?
So AI ethics can be seen as a very
multidisciplinary field of study that Includes experts from of
course computer science and AI but also from social
sciences like you know people that work in sociology
or psychology or philosophy or economies and and many
others as well as also other stakeholders like consumer
rights associations or so and all these people together
try to identify and also. So possibly understand how
to mitigate AI, you know, impact, uh, possible negative
impact on people, society, the environment, and so on.
And these mitigations usually are not just technical ones,
but are mostly, you know, so technical, so involve,
you know, people, decisions, leadership, uh, policies, best practices,
and so on.
So when you think about AI, what do you
think are the core opportunities associated with AI? I
mean, what are the most positive impacts that AI
can have on society if we develop it correctly,
not only from an ethical perspective, but also I
guess from Uh, a technological perspective. So, uh, what
are the main gains that we can get as
human societies from AI?
Yeah, so, um, so first of all, uh, to
identify the opportunities, one has to think about what
is the goal, and then you say, OK, then
there are opportunities to reach that goal or that
vision of the future and and for me, of
course, AI is not the goal. The goal, the
goal is that humanity, you know, thrives and grows
and people learn more and they're more conscious about
themselves and possibly they live, and this can lead
to the ultimate goal which is living together peacefully
and you know, collaborating with each other and so
on. So given that goal then. Then one can
identify whether AI gives us opportunities that are specific
to the capabilities of AI to reach to get
closer to that goal, and I think that there
are many because AI can besides the usual one
that one can think about that AI can help
us solve problems that we haven't solved, that can
help us people, can help solve, you know. Problems
in healthcare that, you know, that uh we, we
don't know uh uh still how to solve or
that can help us tackle with the climate issues
or things like that. So global problems that people
so far, they made a lot of prog we
made a lot of progress, but we still cannot
solve, uh, so that, that's one opportunity for AI
of course AI can also, In an enterprise view
of the role of AI can also augment, you
know, productivity, augment the scientific discovery, augmented efficiency, and
so on, but I think that most AI, uh,
another thing that is very important for me is
that really AI can help humans grow as human
beings, and so we can, for example, take our
um. We can, they can, it can help us
use our cognition in ways that are better suited
for humans, that can help humans grow as human
beings, be more conscious of what we are, learn
more, and therefore learn also how to live with
the others, you know, in a peaceful environment, so
that. ARE all the opportunities of AI, many, many
multifaceted opportunities, whether you are interested in productivity, efficiency
or in scientific discovery or in solving global problems,
but most of all, an overarching thing for me
is really to help humans grow as human beings
individually and collectively.
Uh, SO you mentioned goals. Let me ask you
then, because you said that first, of course, we
have to establish the goals we have in mind
and then we can look at the opportunities that
AI can offer us. So how do we go
about establishing those goals and who should participate in
that process of establishing the goals we have in
mind when it comes to uh applying AI?
Well, I mean, the governance of AI is I
mean it's a global thing, you know, the the
governance of AI has to be put in place
by many different actors and stakeholders around the technology,
which companies that build or use AI, of course
they have an important role to play also because
they can put together a governance that is agile
and faster because it has to go, you know,
at the same pace. Possibly as the evolution of
the technology, then there is the role that governments
may have in putting some baseline rules for everybody
to comply with and then there is also the
role of global governance, best practices or that are
more about the goals like uh what AI role.
Be in our society and and then there are
more general goals like the UN sustainable development goals
that are not about AI but that they define
a vision of the future that these organizations have
decided that collectively that that that should be what
we aspire the future to be.
So since we're talking about AI ethics, we need
also to consider the potential risks associated with it
and not just the benefits or the opportunities we
can get from it. So what would you say
are the main risks we should worry about?
Well, of course, over the years these risks have
evolved because the capabilities of AI have evolved and
with new capabilities and new techniques there come new
opportunities, new applications, but also new or amplified risks.
So the usual ones that were already, um, you
know, were already with the more traditional and narrow
machine learning, not even within. You know, we didn't
have to wait even for generative AI or risk
around privacy, about fairness, about transparency, about explainability, about
robustness, you know, these were already there when we
even we didn't have generative AI, but with generative
AI there are new and amplified risks that have
to do with the content that is generated with
AI. So where there is a risk of, you
know, hallucinations and deep fakes, so the epistemic risk
that we no. LONGER know what is true and
what is false, and we may, uh, you know,
be so confused that by by this effect that
we may not know how to make decisions because
the informed decisions about facts and then we make
our own opinion on top of that. But if
we don't know what is true, what is false,
then this whole structure you know of our decision
making is a bit disrupted. And then of course
there are Issues about um agency, also with the
use of genetic AI and other AI techniques in
agentic AI so we may may risk of delegating
too much, you know, over reliance to this agentic
AI system that you know. I think that a
genetic AI system gives us a lot more opportunities
to automate, simplify everything that we want to do,
but also they may be vulnerable. They may do
unintended actions that may be irreversible, so we We
have to be careful about delegating to the systems
only when we can make sure that they do
what we ask them to do and so we
give the agency of them to act on our
behalf but only under certain assurances and so this.
Um, AND, and that's another, you know, amplification of
risks that goes from with with agentic AI that
has to do with not just one model like
a LLM that can hallucinate or can do things
that we don't want him to do, but also
with the fact that we were putting together an
agentic AI system. Several components. One is an LLM.
One is a tool. One is another thing that
communicate with each other, pass data from one to
the other one. And so the risk can be
not just in each component bringing some possible risk,
but also in the way these things are combined
and they pass information between them. And then of
course there is also another risk that has to
do with the Impact on the environment, you know,
this system requires a lot of resources to be
trained and also to be used. And, and because
they need so much, you know, energy and resources
and funds, then there can be the risk of
power concentration which is a risk in the sense
that power concentration means that only the opinion and
the value. OF few actors are embedded into an
AI system. That's why, for example, at IBM and
in many others, there is a trend for open
source models that allow more, you know, points of
view to be possibly embedded into the model or
or into the post-training, you know, phases so that
Each community can have its own model that is
tuned to the needs of that community.
Mhm. So whenever people discuss the risks associated with
AI, sometimes people bring up, uh, the possibility that
maybe somewhere in the future, AI could uh reach
a level of development where the AI systems would
no longer or may uh could no longer be
under our control and start behaving in ways that
do not. Go in line with the orders we
give them, etc. Uh, DO you think that that
is a a risk worth considering? I mean, how
likely is it that AI systems could just go
against our orders and in a more, I don't
know, apocalyptic kind of scenario, take over society? Is
that something that we should take seriously at all
or not?
So I think that you know talking about these
risks only in the context of a possible future
for super intelligence or AI is a bit of
a I mean, that's not what I like to
do because I think that those kind of risks
are also present now with current AI that is
not yet super intelligent or intelligent like a human
being, um, but it it is much better than
human beings in some dimensions and much worse in
others, like still not as. Uh, RELIABLE, I think,
or, or at least making mistakes that humans would
not make, but also being much better than humans
and other things. So, so I don't have this
linear view of intelligence that AI is getting, you
know, better and better at that in that linear.
TRAJECTORY until it reaches something because I feel that
intelligence is very multifaceted and multi-dimensional. So I still,
I think that right now with the current state
of AI, AI has capabilities that are Allowing a
lot of emerging behaviors, which is good because with
this emerging behavior we get amazing, you know, interactions
with the chat, you know, with conversational chatbots that
can help us, you know, think about new ideas
or discoveries and so on, so amazing things, but
also these. BEHAVIOR may be unintended sometimes because it's
not easy for humans or whether you use a
piece of code or natural language, it's not easy
for us to specify exactly all the boundaries of
the behavior of an AI system and so the
emerging behavior can be within the boundaries we. Because
we don't specify everything, but it can be unintended
for us and then it can be also unintended
in a negative way. So say AI, we have
seen an AI system that do things that those
who designed and built the AI system did not
intend and did not want them to do. And
so there is already the risk of AI. Going
beyond our control in the sense that it generates
these emerging behaviors that are not expected and are
not intended, so. So I think that again we
don't need to wait for a future of super
intelligence for being to be really in the presence
of these unintended behaviors. So if you want to
say things are out of our control because an
agent does things that we don't want him to
do. It can be seen as something that is
out of our control, but not because again of
some intentional thing from AI. So AI does not
have intentions. AI does not have morality or ethics.
It's just designed by us according to certain objectives,
objective functions. But, but again, these emerging behaviors are
amazing and good, but also they can include some
risks.
So, uh, with, uh, keeping in mind the risks
that you mentioned earlier, I mean, everything from, uh,
deep fakes, from the violation of people's privacy, from
the spread of disinformation, uh, contributing to climate change
as well through, uh, the high consumption of resources
like electricity and water. How do you think we
should best mitigate these risks?
Yeah, so as I said, you know, that's all
about the governance and the more capabilities you have
like going from traditional machine learning to generative AI
to agenttic AI, and the more, you know, it's
clear that you need the governance in done in
a very structured and principled way and and the
and the governance. Like, you know, personally, you know,
I, I'm very much involved into corporate governance, building
inside the corporate company the right way of assessing
the risks and then building the tools or the
other processes to mitigate them. Uh, AND of course
inside a company, uh, governance can mean many different
things. It can mean a checklist, which is not
ideal as a way of governing a checklist, you
know, did you do this test, da da da,
done, that's not the right way. Because it needs
a lot of pieces to be put in place
from the structures that make decisions about AI ethics
like the AI ethics boards or things like that,
or the internal processes that do the risk assessment.
The culture and the education of everybody, you know,
around the AI ethics and the risks and the
mitigations that are available, um, the leadership culture that
should reward and incentivize the right behavior of the
teams and incentivize, you know, and not say just
speed for delivery that. Does not help in, you
know, in actually delivering the right kind of technology.
And then the integration of all these pieces of
this AI ethics governance into the processes that the
company already has in place. So all these pieces
are very important, you know, the incentives and the
people kind of pieces are even more important than
just producing the technical tools to actually do the
test or the benchmarks or the mitigation and so
on. Um, AND then of course I think that
regulations has a role in playing in this governance
overall, uh, as well as standards, international standards that
really play an important role. Um, AND, and, but
they have complementary roles. I feel that regulations can
be a baseline for everybody to be on the
same level of compliance, and then each company, depending
on the business model, can decide which are the
risks that are more relevant or less relevant for
that business model and therefore build the governance depending
on that, um, so. So the mitigation has to
do also with the education of the users that
of course in an enterprise AI environment is easier
in a sense because for example IBM delivers AI
solutions to other companies and in those companies we
can help those companies to train the AI users
so that they use it in the most appropriate.
Way you use it, you know, you use it
only when it was tested in the environment in
the scenario where it was tested, or you use
it knowing that it can hallucinate. So you train
the users in a more consumer AI environment where
you have a conversational chatbot that everybody in the
world can use asking any questions about any topic.
Then it's a bit more difficult to train all
these users, but of course there is the need
for governments and societies in general to help everybody
understands, not being experts of AI, but everybody understands
what's the right way, the appropriate way to use
AI, knowing the capabilities, but also knowing the current
limitations.
Do you think that there's any set of universal
principles that should undergird the development and adoption of
AI, and if so, what would these principles be?
Well, I mean, in general, I think that again
this idea that AI should augment and support human
capabilities, human cognition, human thriving, human growth, that's, I
think should be rather universal. But apart from that,
there are a lot of values like again we
mentioned privacy, we mentioned transparency, credibility, a lot of
values that are important for human beings, fairness, no.
But that are spelled out a little bit different
in different cultures and that are prioritized in different
ways because when you make decisions about AI regarding
some AI ethics issue, it's never a decision that
you can avoid or completely go to zero with
the risk. Like consider fairness for example. Fairness has
more than 21 definitions. There was a famous tutorial
with 21 definitions of fairness, but fairness has many,
many different definitions. Some of them are more appropriate
in some use cases, some others in other use
cases. And so the way a community decides, you
know, which is the fairness definition that is most
appropriate for that community may be completely different from
what is appropriate for another community or another culture.
Also, most of the decisions that You make about
not just about one value fairness that has a
lot of different definitions um but also even if
you decide one definition, you may have fairness between
different variables like protected variables or race or ethnicity
or age or gender and so on and so
there is a lot of inter inter intersectionality. Issues
meaning that you may reduce bias, you know, on,
on some protected variable, but this may improve, increase
the bias in another thing so the things are
not independent on each other, so it's always almost
impossible to reduce and put to zero bias in
all the dimensions that you want. So you always
have to think about. Decisions in AI ethics as
reaching trade-offs. Trade-offs between, in this case, different, you
know, fairness on different dimensions, but also trade-off between
different values like for example between control and autonomy,
between innovation or speed and safety, between fairness or
accuracy and privacy, so you always have to reach.
A trade-off between different properties or values that you
care about and so that's why those that make
decisions in governments or in companies about AI ethics
need to be very well trained in thinking. It's
not just a checklist. You cannot reduce it to
a checklist because you need to be able to
make these nuanced judgments about these trade-offs. And something
that can inform these trade-offs, that's why it's very
important the cooperation with the philosophers, for example, you
know, it's like because depending on the ethics frameworks
that is in your mind or in your community,
so it's more the ontologies, then uh then you
have some red lines of things that absolutely are
wrong independently of what the consequences are, and some
actions are definitely wrong. You won't, you don't want
to do that. And you don't want the AI
to do that. Or if you are more of
a utilitarian approach, there are no bad and good
actions. I just look at the consequences of these
actions and uh and then because of that I
make my decisions. So these ethics frameworks or virtue
ethics or Confucianism or Ubuntu ethics. So depending on
where your community is based in terms of its
culture and, and the ethics frameworks that are um.
Supporting, you know, in embedded in that culture, then
you'll see making different trade-offs among that all different
decisions around the trade-offs that are typical in AI
ethics.
Do you think that with all of that in
mind and since AI systems and the principles that
undergird them would or are developing in different socio-cultural
contexts, the participation of anthropologists would also be warranted.
I mean, could they play an important role here?
Yeah,
yeah, understanding how cultures, uh, you know, are, um.
Our cultures evolve and are thinking about these issues,
definitely can be, and I don't think in the
discussion that I've been involved in several years, I
don't think I've seen anthropologists, I've seen philosophers, psychologists,
sociologists, economists, but not anthropologists, and it may be
a good idea to include them as well.
So, uh, I have one last topic I would
like to explore with you, with you. I read
in your work about a good AI society. Could
you tell us what does that term mean or,
or that idea mean? What is a good or
what would be a good AI society?
Well, to me, I mean, a good AI society
is not a society where AI is used everywhere
or AI is not used at all, but it's
a society where the use of AI is deliberate.
So the use of AI is conscious, conscious human
consciousness, so that humans use AI in a conscious
and deliberate way and where they are. They know
where they and they can decide whether they are
subject, for example, to automated decisions and so and
and they retain their agency, so they have ability
to control the AI to not being subject to
decisions by AI or yes if they want to
to possibly override the decision of AI. So it's
really a society where AI augments human agency and
judgment and does not really instead quietly or you
know little by little replacing that human judgment and
agency so where humans retain their agency, their consciousness
of how to deliberately and intentionally use AI for
what they want and maybe not for what they
don't want.
Uh, GREAT. So, uh, let me just ask you
then, uh, how do you look at the future
of AI? Do you see it developing in a
proper way? Do you think that we are perhaps,
uh, under, uh, exploring some of the, some of
its potentialities, or maybe it's, uh, developing, uh, too
fast?
Well, I mean, uh, developing too fast, I'm not
sure. I mean, it's just that uh maybe it's
it's at the at the deployment phase that we
have to be careful about deploying when we have
all the right governance structures in place, um, but
um I think that for me the future of
AI is. Really, first of all, as I mentioned
already, is not just the future of AI but
it is the future of humans with the support
of AI. So then in that picture you have
to put together both actors, you know, the technology,
but also the human beings, and I think that
we are moving in a direction where. WHERE AI
is being AI capabilities are the focus, you know,
we want to expand and improve AI capabilities, but
I think that there is a space for thinking
more about how these AI capabilities fit within the
goal of augmenting humans' capabilities and humans agency, so.
Currently in my project I try to be inspired
also by cognitive theories of how humans make decisions
or how humans even relate with the technology to
build AI, you know, to improve AI capabilities in
a way that really supports that vision. So, but
overall I mean I think that there is. Not
many people that are not amazed by the incredible
evolution of these AI capabilities or they're not amazed
about, you know, interacting with the conversational chatbots or
looking at the realistic images that are produced, so
it's really amazing. It's something that even researchers in
AI were not really. Participating for many, many years,
researchers, for example, tried to harness you know natural
language and uh and uh and uh and and
this uh the fact that we that now we
did do that it was a surprise and uh
and and this allows this was a big game
changer because it allowed. Allows everybody, not just people
that can code to interact with AI systems and
to have them do whatever they want them to
do in a very easy way, and that changes
really the impact of AI that can that AI
can have, not just, you know, in supporting those
that produce code or those that are in companies
that can use AI delivered as a system. OR
as a service, but everybody, so this incredible democratization
of the delivery of AI capabilities to everybody is
going to really to change, and I hope that
people take this opportunity to do the best with
what they have, you know, before generative AI people
had all the knowledge in the world. In their
phone, you know, like on, on the web, and
they could access it easily and so on, but
now they have much more than that. They have
all the, all the, I mean, all the is
a bit, uh, uh, I mean not really true
because AI learns from whatever is on the web,
which is not all the knowledge, of course, and
that's the problem also, and that's one of the
risks because it doesn't represent all the. Communities equally
well or the language is equally well, you know,
and also there are some, many things that we
don't write on the web like common sense reasoning
things. So that's why the AI has trouble with
those. But, uh, but so everybody has this this
cognition, artificial cognition, which is different from a human
one available at their hands. So I really hope
that they can use it in the best way.
OK, so Dr. Rossi, I will be leaving links
to your work in the description of the interview
and thank you so much for taking the time
to come on the show. It's been a fascinating
conversation. Of course, thank you. Hi guys, thank you
for watching this interview until the end. If you
liked it, please share it, leave a like and
hit the subscription button. The show is brought to
you by Enlights Learning and Development done differently. Check
their website at enlights.com and also please consider supporting
the show on Patreon or PayPal. I would also
like to give a huge thank you to my
main patrons and PayPal supporters, Perergo Larsson, Jerry Muller,
Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf, Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew
Whittingbird, Arnaud Wolf, Tim Hollis, Eric Elena, John Connors,
Philip Forrest Connolly. Then Dmitri Robert Windegerru Inasi Zu
Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor, Michel Stormir, Samuel Andrea,
Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoro, and Hal Herz Agnon, Michel
Jonathan Labrarith, John Yardston, and Samuel Curric, Hines, Mark
Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran, David Sloan Wilson,
Yasilla Dezarajo Romain Roach, Diego Londono Correa. Yannik Punteran
Rusmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro, Adam Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alec
Baka Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov, Zal Adrian Yei
Poltontin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall, Eddin Bronner,
Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolotti, Gabriel Pan Scortez or Suliliski,
Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffyanny Smith, and Wiseman. Daniel
Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno, Luke Lovai, Georgios
Theophanus, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David Williams, Di Acosta,
Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli
Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior. Old Eringbon.
Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert Grassy, Zigoren, Jeff
McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark Kempel, Thomas Dovner,
Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert, Jessica
Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Ekoriati,
Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van Goler, Alexander Obert,
Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular, Janus Hetner,
Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov, Sean Nelson, Mike
Levin, and Jos Necht. A special thanks to my
producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank Lucas Stink, Tom Vanneden,
Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and
Patrick Tobin, John Carlomon Negro, Al Nick Cortiz and
Nick Golden, and to my executive producers, Matthew Lavender,
Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie. Thank you for
all.